---
layout: default
title:  "When to use requirements.txt, pyproject.tol, and poetry.lock"
---

# When and where to use requirements.txt, pyproject.toml, and poetry.lock

This is info I learned in 2013 while developing in Ruby. It's applicable to packaging in other languages, not just Python, and are as valid in 2024 as they were then.

## Summary

What are you developing?

  - *reusable package:* Use poetry, write a pyproject.toml, and don't commit `poetry.lock`.
  - *application:* Use poetry and *do* commit `poetry.lock`.
  - *nothing long term, don't care:* Use pip and `requirements.txt`.

## Simple short term use

Suppose you want to start off simple, so you write the following to `requirements.txt`:

```
pandas
scipy
scikit-learn
```

and run `pip install -r requirements.txt`. It's a nice simple format, and you get the latest compatible versions of each package.

Now that you have the latest compatible version of each package, you develop code against these packages.

### Simple short term use - failure

You come back to it years later, run `pip install -r requirements.txt` again, run the code, and this time you get strange errors and nothing works.

What happened?

Newer versions of pandas, scipy, or scikit-learn were released, maybe newer versions of their dependencies were released, and one of those packages contains changes that break your code.

### Aside: Breaking changes

By convention, most packages roughly follow [semver](https://semver.org/), and this means they will not release breaking changes unless they bump the major version.

Here, we haven't constrained our package versions at all, so we have basically said we'll accept any breaking changes thrown at us.

Can we solve the problem by using constraints?

```
pandas<3.0.0
scipy<1.13.1
scikit-learn<2.0.0
```

That's much better - we guarded our code against breaking changes from our immediate dependencies. However, in practice, this is not enough.

In the modern software world, you rely on a mountain of dependencies if you include transitive dependencies, and some of these could have new versions released that contain bugs. Alternatively, maybe your code relies on functionality that the developers of your dependencies aren't even aware of, and they break this while fixing something else. For example, I have noticed a tendency towards safety in `pandas`, and while these changes broadly improve the library, they often break code that uses it in subtle ways.

## Application code - use poetry and commit the lockfile

When developing an application as opposed to a library, your code is being used directly, rather than depended on by another codebase. You also need to make life easier for other developers working on the same codebase.

Here, you can't afford to be de-railed by random issues from your dependencies. However, you generally don't have to support multiple different versions of your dependencies, so you have the luxury of pinning them to exact versions.

For this to work with `requirements.txt`, you'd have to pin every version, not just for your direct dependencies, but for dependencies of those dependencies, and so on. This solves the problem, but it ultimately leads to dependency hell. Whenever I have to do this as a short term workaround, I call the file `requirements.txt.lock`.

The solution is to have two files, one file to neatly specify version constraints, and another file, called a "lockfile", to specify the set of dependency versions you're actually using. The lockfile should be generated automatically by a package manager. You should not need to edit the lockfile.

Python was very late to the party here - ruby has had bundler since 2009, node has had npm since 2010. Nearly every language has had a package manager that uses a lockfile for a very long time.

I know of two Python package managers that support a lockfile, and those are Pipenv and Poetry. Personally I prefer poetry because I have found it to be much faster at resolving version constraints when I had to add it to a large project.

`pyproject.toml`

```
[tool.poetry]
name = ...
version = ...
description = ...
authors = [...]
readme = ...

[tool.poetry.dependencies]
python = ...
pandas = "^2"
scipy = "^1"
scikit-learn = "^1"
```

After running `poetry lock`, it outputs our lockfile, `poetry.lock`. If we commit this file, we can ensure that other developers get exactly the same dependency versions, and also our application is deployed with the exact same dependency versions as those we developed it against.

The usefulness of this approach increases with the complexity of your application.

## Library code - use pyproject.toml, don't pin, and don't commit the lockfile

When developing a package, your code is someone else's dependency, and must coexist with their other dependencies.

Here, pinning dependencies is really bad. Suppose we pin our 3 dependencies (`pandas==2.2.2`, `scipy==1.13.1`, and `scikit-learn==1.5.0`). Then, suppose that some developer called `AAA` is using our package, but also depends on `foo==0.0.1`. If `foo` `0.0.1` pins `pandas` to a different version to ours, say, `2.2.1`, then `AAA`'s dependencies are incompatible and it's partly our fault.

Think this never happens in practice? Think again! Try and support a range of versions if possible.

If you use poetry to install your dependencies, it will generate a lockfile. Lockfiles help other developers replicate your exact set of dependencies, making it more likely that your code will work elsewhere. However, this is the opposite of what you want here - you want your code to work with as many of the combinations of dependencies allowed in `pyproject.toml` as possible. If you let everyone in your team replicate your setup exactly, you risk your code only working for that narrow set of dependencies, and breaking when used in a real project by someone else. So, don't commit the lockfile.

Almost finally, why use pyproject.toml? `pyproject.toml` is not only supported by poetry, it's a replacement for `setup.py` to be used generally, and it means package metadata can be read without having to run arbitrary python code.

Finally, why use poetry? There's actually no solid reason you can't use pip or pipenv here, but personally I have found poetry to be faster and more polished, so I use it.

